README.md, before:

# Odio API

> The universal remote for your Linux multimedia server

[![CI](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Build](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api)

Building a Linux multimedia setup is easy. Integrating it cleanly into Home Assistant always felt hacky — scattered integrations, SSH scripts, and fragile glue.

Odio is an ultra-lightweight Go daemon that exposes a single clean REST API over your Linux user session's D-Bus: MPRIS players (Spotify, VLC, Firefox, MPD, Kodi), PulseAudio/PipeWire, systemd user services, and power management. No root. No hacks. Just Linux primitives.

Tested on Fedora 43 Gnome, Debian 13 KDE, Raspbian 13 — Raspberry Pi B through Pi 5. Works without any system tweak.

## Quick Start

Start Spotify, VLC, or any MPRIS player first, then:

```bash
# 1. Config (bind: all required for Docker)
cp share/config.yaml config.yaml

# 2. Start
docker compose up -d

# 3. Test
curl http://localhost:8018/players
curl http://localhost:8018/audio/server
```

→ See [Installation](#installation) for systemd service, packages, or running from source.

## Home Assistant Integration

**[odio-ha](https://github.com/b0bbywan/odio-ha)** is the official Home Assistant integration for Odio.

Install via HACS → Custom Repositories → `https://github.com/b0bbywan/odio-ha`

What it exposes as HA entities:
- `media_player` — global PulseAudio/PipeWire audio receiver (volume, mute)
- `media_player` per systemd service — power on/off, volume, state tracking (MPD, Kodi, shairport-sync, etc.)
- MPRIS players — auto-discovered players with full playback control and metadata *(in progress)*

Odio becomes the hub that makes all your HA integrations point to the correct machine. MPD service lifecycle managed by Odio, rich playback via HA's existing MPD integration — the two work together.

## Use Cases

| Setup | What Odio gives you |
|---|---|
| RPi music server (MPD + shairport-sync) | MPRIS control + restart services from HA |
| HTPC / Kodi | Start/stop Kodi, MPRIS control via odio-ha |
| Firefox kiosk (Netflix, YouTube) | Launch/kill kiosks from HA automations |
| Headless Spotify (spotifyd) | MPRIS playback + service lifecycle |
| Any PulseAudio/PipeWire setup | Per-client and global volume/mute control |

## Features

### Media Player Control (MPRIS)

Auto-discovers all MPRIS-compatible players in real time — Spotify, VLC, Firefox, MPD, Kodi, etc. Add a new player and it appears immediately, zero config.

- Full playback control: play, pause, stop, next, previous
- Volume, seek, and position control
- Shuffle and loop mode management
- Real-time state updates via D-Bus signals
- Smart caching with automatic cache invalidation
- Position heartbeat for accurate playback tracking

### Audio Management (PulseAudio/PipeWire)

- Server info and default output
- Global and per-client volume/mute control
- Real-time audio events via native PulseAudio monitoring
- Limited PipeWire support via `pipewire-pulse`

### Service Management (systemd)

Explicit whitelist required — nothing managed unless listed in `config.yaml`.

- List and monitor whitelisted systemd services (system + user)
- Start, stop, restart, enable, disable user services
- Real-time service state updates via D-Bus signals
- Disabled by default

⚠️ **Security model:** Odio enforces user-session mutations only at the application layer, regardless of D-Bus or polkit configuration. System units are strictly read-only. See [Security](#security) for full details.

### Power Management

Remote reboot and power-off via the REST API — no SSH needed for day-to-day operations. Disabled by default. Uses `org.freedesktop.login1` D-Bus interface.

### REST API

- `<50ms` p95 response time, `0%` CPU on idle — tested on Raspberry Pi B and B+
- Localhost binding by default, configurable per network interface
- Zeroconf/mDNS auto-discovery on the LAN (opt-in)

## Platform Support

| Architecture | Package | Tested on |
|---|---|---|
| amd64 | deb, rpm | Fedora 43 Gnome, Debian 13 KDE |
| arm64 | deb, rpm | Raspberry Pi 3/4/5 (64-bit) |
| armv7hf | deb, rpm | Raspberry Pi 2/3 (32-bit) |
| **armhf (ARMv6)** | deb, rpm | **Raspberry Pi B / B+ / Zero** |

Pre-built packages and a multi-arch Docker image (amd64, arm64, arm/v6, arm/v7) are available on every build.

## Roadmap

- **v0.6** — Built-in web dashboard served by Odio itself at `/ui/`
- **v0.7** — Bluetooth backend: turn your Linux box into a fully API-controllable BT speaker, exposed as a `media_player` in HA
- Later: SSE push events, Authentication, Wayland Remote Control, Photos Casting

## Installation

### Packages (deb / rpm)

Pre-built packages for amd64, arm64, armhf (ARMv6), and armv7hf are available as artifacts on each [build workflow run](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/build.yml).

```bash
# Debian/Ubuntu/Raspberry Pi OS
sudo dpkg -i odio-api_<version>_amd64.deb

# Fedora/RHEL
sudo rpm -i odio-api-<version>.x86_64.rpm
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api.git
cd go-odio-api
task build    # builds CSS + Go binary with version from git
./bin/odio-api
```

### systemd User Service

Create `~/.config/systemd/user/odio-api.service`:

```ini
[Unit]
Description=Dbus api for Odio
Documentation=https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api
Wants=sound.target
After=sound.target
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]
ExecStart=/usr/bin/odio-api
Restart=always
RestartSec=12
TimeoutSec=30

[Install]
WantedBy=default.target
```

```bash
systemctl --user daemon-reload
systemctl --user enable odio-api.service
systemctl --user start odio-api.service
```

**Headless systems:** Enable lingering so the user session (PulseAudio/PipeWire, D-Bus, `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR`) survives without an active login:

```bash
sudo loginctl enable-linger <username>
```

### Docker

A pre-built multi-arch image is available on GHCR (amd64, arm64, arm/v6, arm/v7):

```
ghcr.io/b0bbywan/go-odio-api:latest
```

#### Quick start

```bash
# 1. Prepare configuration (bind: all required for Docker)
cp share/config.yaml config.yaml
# Edit config.yaml: set bind: all

# 2. (Optional) Provide your PulseAudio cookie
cp ~/.config/pulse/cookie ./cookie

# 3. (Optional) Only needed if docker compose config shows wrong paths
cp .env.example .env

# 4. Start
docker compose up -d
```

The `docker-compose.yml` reads `UID`, `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR`, `HOME` and `DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS`
directly from your shell environment — no configuration needed for a standard Linux setup.
See `.env.example` if your shell doesn't export these automatically (e.g. fish).

Environment variables passed to the container:

| Variable | Source | Purpose |
|---|---|---|
| `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR` | host env → fallback `/run/user/$UID` | D-Bus and PulseAudio runtime directory |
| `DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS` | host env → fallback derived from `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR` | User D-Bus session socket |
| `HOME` | host env → fallback `/home/odio` | PulseAudio cookie lookup path |

Volumes mounted (all read-only):

| Volume | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `./config.yaml` | odio configuration |
| `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/bus` | user D-Bus session socket |
| `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/systemd` | user systemd folder (utmp unavailable) |
| `/run/utmp` | user systemd monitoring (utmp available) |
| `/var/run/dbus/system_bus_socket` | system D-Bus socket |
| `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/pulse` | PulseAudio socket |
| `./cookie` → `$HOME/.config/pulse/cookie` | PulseAudio cookie |

**Note:** `bind` must be set to `all` in `config.yaml` for Docker (bridge network). Zeroconf won't work in bridge network mode. Host network mode is strongly discouraged.

To build locally instead:
```bash
docker build -t odio-api .
```

#### Command-line Flags

- `--config <path>` — specify a custom YAML configuration file
- `--version` — print version and exit
- `--help` — show help message

## Configuration

Configuration file locations (in order of precedence):
- Specified with `--config <path>`
- `~/.config/odio-api/config.yaml` (user-specific)
- `/etc/odio-api/config.yaml` (system-wide)
- A default configuration is available in `share/config.yaml`

Disabling a backend disables the backend and all its routes.

```yaml
bind: lo
logLevel: info

api:
  enabled: true
  port: 8018

zeroconf:
  enabled: false

mpris:
  enabled: true
  timeout: 5s

pulseaudio:
  enabled: true

systemd:
  enabled: false
  system:
    -
  user:
    -

power:
  enabled: false
  capabilities:
    poweroff: false
    reboot: false
```

### Backend configuration examples

#### systemd (opt-in, whitelist required)

```yaml
systemd:
  enabled: true
  system:
    - bluetooth.service
    - upmpdcli.service
  user:
    - pipewire-pulse.service
    - pulseaudio.service
    - mpd.service                       # see [1]
    - shairport-sync.service            # see [2]
    - snapclient.service                # incompatible with mpris
    - spotifyd.service                  # see [3]
    - firefox-kiosk@netflix.com.service # default support for mpris
    - firefox-kiosk@youtube.com.service # default support for mpris
    - firefox-kiosk@my.home-assistant.io.service
    - kodi.service                      # see [4]
    - vlc.service                       # default support for mpris
    - plex.service                      # see [5]
```
[1] Install `mpd-mpris` or `mpDris2` for MPRIS support
[2] Check my [article on Medium: Shairport Sync/Airplay with PulseAudio and MPRIS support](https://medium.com/@mathieu-requillart/set-up-a-b83d9c980e75)
[3] Default on desktop; on headless, your spotifyd version [must be built with MPRIS support](https://docs.spotifyd.rs/advanced/dbus.html)
[4] Install [Kodi Add-on: MPRIS D-Bus interface](https://github.com/wastis/MediaPlayerRemoteInterface#)
[5] Maybe supported, untested

#### Power Management

```yaml
power:
  enabled: true
  capabilities:
    poweroff: true
    reboot: true
```

#### Network binding

```yaml
bind: lo
# bind: enp2s0    # Specific network interface
# bind: wlan0     # WiFi interface
# bind: all       # All interfaces (Docker, remote access)
```

#### Zeroconf / mDNS

```yaml
bind: eno1
zeroconf:
  enabled: true
```

Odio advertises itself via mDNS. Look for `_http._tcp.local.` → instance `odio-api`. Disabled on `lo` binding.

### Security defaults

- **Localhost binding by default** — prevents accidental network exposure
- **Systemd disabled by default** — service control must be explicitly enabled and configured
- **Read-only Docker mounts** — all volume mounts are read-only in the provided `docker-compose.yml`
- **Zeroconf opt-in** — mDNS adapts to `bind`: disabled on `lo`, enabled on specific interfaces

## API Endpoints

### Server Information

```
GET    /server                             # {"hostname":"","os_platform":"","os_version":"","api_sw":"","api_version":"","backends":{"mpris":true,"pulseaudio":true,"systemd":false,"zeroconf":false}}
```

### MPRIS Media Players

```
GET    /players                           # List all media players
POST   /players/{player}/play             # Play
POST   /players/{player}/pause            # Pause
POST   /players/{player}/play_pause       # Toggle play/pause
POST   /players/{player}/stop             # Stop
POST   /players/{player}/next             # Next track
POST   /players/{player}/previous         # Previous track
POST   /players/{player}/seek             # Seek (body: {"offset": 1000000})
POST   /players/{player}/position         # Set position (body: {"track_id": "...", "position": 0})
POST   /players/{player}/volume           # Set volume (body: {"volume": 0.5})
POST   /players/{player}/loop             # Set loop status (body: {"loop": "None|Track|Playlist"})
POST   /players/{player}/shuffle          # Set shuffle (body: {"shuffle": true})
```

### PulseAudio

```
GET    /audio/server                      # Get server info
POST   /audio/server/mute                 # Mute/unmute server
POST   /audio/server/volume               # Set server volume (body: {"volume": 0.5})
GET    /audio/clients                     # List audio clients (sink-inputs)
POST   /audio/clients/{sink}/mute         # Mute/unmute client
POST   /audio/clients/{sink}/volume       # Set client volume (body: {"volume": 0.5})
```

### Systemd Services

```
GET    /services                          # List all monitored services
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/start     # Start service (scope: system|user)
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/stop      # Stop service (scope: system|user)
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/restart   # Restart service
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/enable    # Enable service (scope: system|user)
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/disable   # Disable service
```

### Power Management

```
GET    /power/                            # Power capabilities {"reboot": true, "power_off": false}
POST   /power/power_off                   # Poweroff (403 if not declared in capabilities)
POST   /power/reboot                      # Reboot (403 if not declared in capabilities)
```

## Security

### systemd backend

⚠️ **Security Notice**

Systemd control is disabled by default and requires an explicit whitelist. Odio mitigates risks with deliberate security design:

- **Disabled by default** — must explicitly set `systemd.enabled: true` AND configure units. Empty config → auto-disabled even with `enabled: true`.
- **Localhost only** — API binds to `lo` by default. Never expose to untrusted networks or the Internet.
- **User-only mutations** — start/stop/restart/enable/disable only work on user D-Bus. System units are strictly read-only, enforced at the application layer regardless of D-Bus or polkit configuration. This protects against misconfigured or compromised D-Bus setups.
- **Root forbidden by design** — Odio refuses to run as root.
- **No preconfigured units** — nothing managed unless explicitly listed.

**You must knowingly enable this at your own risk.** Odio is free software and comes with no warranty.

### REST API

⚠️ **Security Notice:** No authentication mechanism is provided. **Never expose this API to untrusted networks or the Internet.** Designed for localhost or trusted LAN use only.

## Architecture

### Key Design: The User Session

All multimedia services run as systemd user units — not system-wide daemons. This unlocks a single, unified D-Bus session bus where PulseAudio/PipeWire, MPRIS players, and user systemd units all coexist. Odio listens to that bus and exposes everything via HTTP. Add a new MPRIS player — it appears immediately, zero code or config change.

### Backends

- **MPRIS Backend** — D-Bus communication with media players, smart caching, real-time D-Bus signal updates
- **PulseAudio Backend** — native PulseAudio protocol (pure Go, no libpulse), real-time event monitoring
- **Systemd Backend** — D-Bus with filesystem monitoring fallback (`/run/user/{uid}/systemd/units`)
- **Power Backend** — `org.freedesktop.login1` D-Bus interface

### Performance

- Caching reduces D-Bus calls by ~90%
- D-Bus signal-based updates instead of polling
- Batch property retrieval
- Automatic heartbeat management for position tracking
- Connection pooling and timeout handling

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.24 or higher

### Running Tests

```bash
go test ./...
go test -cover ./...

go test ./backend/mpris/...
go test ./backend/pulseaudio/...
go test ./backend/systemd/...
```

### Building

The project uses [Task](https://taskfile.dev) for build automation.

```bash
# Install Task (once)
go install github.com/go-task/task/v3/cmd/task@latest

# Build for the current host (CSS + Go binary, version from git)
task build

# Cross-compile for all supported architectures (output: dist/)
task build:all-arch

# Individual targets
task build:linux-amd64     # x86_64
task build:linux-arm64     # RPi 3/4/5 64-bit
task build:linux-armv7hf   # RPi 2/3 32-bit (ARMv7)
task build:linux-armhf     # RPi B/B+/Zero (ARMv6, RPi OS armhf)

# CSS only
task css              # Ensure CSS is available (compile or download from CDN)
task css-local        # Compile locally (requires Tailwind CLI)
task css:watch        # Watch mode for development
```

**Note:** `task build` injects the version via `-ldflags` from `git describe`. The version is visible via `./bin/odio-api --version`.

#### CSS Build Strategy

The UI uses Tailwind CSS with an intelligent multi-architecture build strategy:

- **Development (x64/arm64/armv7)** — `task build` compiles CSS locally using Tailwind CLI
- **Legacy ARM (ARMv6 — Raspberry Pi B/B+)** — `task build` downloads pre-built CSS from CDN (`https://bobbywan.me/odio-css/`)

Tailwind CLI doesn't provide ARMv6 binaries. The CSS is architecture-independent, so it's compiled on x64 and distributed via CDN.

**CDN structure:**
```
https://bobbywan.me/odio-css/
  main/abc1234.css          # commit-specific
  main/latest.css           # latest for branch
  tags/v0.6.0.css           # release tags (never cleaned)
```

CSS files are **not** committed to the repository.

### Packaging (deb / rpm)

Packages are built with [nfpm](https://nfpm.goreleaser.com/) via Task.

```bash
# Install nfpm (once)
go install github.com/goreleaser/nfpm/v2/cmd/nfpm@latest

# Build all packages for all architectures (output: dist/)
task package:all

# Individual targets
task package:deb:linux-amd64     # .deb amd64
task package:deb:linux-arm64     # .deb arm64
task package:deb:linux-armv7hf   # .deb armv7hf
task package:deb:linux-armhf     # .deb armhf (ARMv6, RPi OS)
task package:rpm:linux-amd64     # .rpm x86_64
task package:rpm:linux-arm64     # .rpm aarch64
task package:rpm:linux-armv7hf   # .rpm armv7hl
task package:rpm:linux-armhf     # .rpm armv6hl
```

## Dependencies

- [spf13/viper](https://github.com/spf13/viper) — configuration
- [godbus/dbus](https://github.com/godbus/dbus) — D-Bus bindings
- [coreos/go-systemd](https://github.com/coreos/go-systemd) — systemd D-Bus bindings
- [the-jonsey/pulseaudio](https://github.com/the-jonsey/pulseaudio) — pure-Go PulseAudio native protocol (no libpulse)
- [grandcat/zeroconf](https://github.com/grandcat/zeroconf) — mDNS / DNS-SD

## Contributing

Odio was first pushed on January 25, 2026. It's early stage — v0.4 works out of the box, but there's a long road ahead. Expect bugs.

**Does it work on your setup? What breaks? What's missing?**

Try it. Tell me what works and what doesn't. Show me your setup. If you want to contribute code, even better — Go is a great language for this use case.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

For issues and questions: [GitHub repository](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api)

## License

BSD 2-Clause License — see the LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

docs: document list syntax for bind and UI loopback requirement
The bind option accepts a list (e.g. [lo, enp2s0]) since the beginning
but this wasn't visible in the README — only scalar examples were shown.
Also documents that the built-in UI requires 'lo' in the bind list,
which is enforced at runtime (config.go:311).

https://claude.ai/code/session_01GwPe5tCsib8gdiU7UNfH1N

README.md, after:

# Odio API

> The universal remote for your Linux multimedia server

[![CI](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Build](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api)

Building a Linux multimedia setup is easy. Integrating it cleanly into Home Assistant always felt hacky — scattered integrations, SSH scripts, and fragile glue.

Odio is an ultra-lightweight Go daemon that exposes a single clean REST API over your Linux user session's D-Bus: MPRIS players (Spotify, VLC, Firefox, MPD, Kodi), PulseAudio/PipeWire, systemd user services, and power management. No root. No hacks. Just Linux primitives.

Tested on Fedora 43 Gnome, Debian 13 KDE, Raspbian 13 — Raspberry Pi B through Pi 5. Works without any system tweak.

## Quick Start

Start Spotify, VLC, or any MPRIS player first, then:

```bash
# 1. Config (bind: all required for Docker)
cp share/config.yaml config.yaml

# 2. Start
docker compose up -d

# 3. Test
curl http://localhost:8018/players
curl http://localhost:8018/audio/server
```

→ See [Installation](#installation) for systemd service, packages, or running from source.

## Home Assistant Integration

**[odio-ha](https://github.com/b0bbywan/odio-ha)** is the official Home Assistant integration for Odio.

Install via HACS → Custom Repositories → `https://github.com/b0bbywan/odio-ha`

What it exposes as HA entities:
- `media_player` — global PulseAudio/PipeWire audio receiver (volume, mute)
- `media_player` per systemd service — power on/off, volume, state tracking (MPD, Kodi, shairport-sync, etc.)
- MPRIS players — auto-discovered players with full playback control and metadata *(in progress)*

Odio becomes the hub that makes all your HA integrations point to the correct machine. MPD service lifecycle managed by Odio, rich playback via HA's existing MPD integration — the two work together.

## Use Cases

| Setup | What Odio gives you |
|---|---|
| RPi music server (MPD + shairport-sync) | MPRIS control + restart services from HA |
| HTPC / Kodi | Start/stop Kodi, MPRIS control via odio-ha |
| Firefox kiosk (Netflix, YouTube) | Launch/kill kiosks from HA automations |
| Headless Spotify (spotifyd) | MPRIS playback + service lifecycle |
| Any PulseAudio/PipeWire setup | Per-client and global volume/mute control |

## Features

### Media Player Control (MPRIS)

Auto-discovers all MPRIS-compatible players in real time — Spotify, VLC, Firefox, MPD, Kodi, etc. Add a new player and it appears immediately, zero config.

- Full playback control: play, pause, stop, next, previous
- Volume, seek, and position control
- Shuffle and loop mode management
- Real-time state updates via D-Bus signals
- Smart caching with automatic cache invalidation
- Position heartbeat for accurate playback tracking

### Audio Management (PulseAudio/PipeWire)

- Server info and default output
- Global and per-client volume/mute control
- Real-time audio events via native PulseAudio monitoring
- Limited PipeWire support via `pipewire-pulse`

### Service Management (systemd)

Explicit whitelist required — nothing managed unless listed in `config.yaml`.

- List and monitor whitelisted systemd services (system + user)
- Start, stop, restart, enable, disable user services
- Real-time service state updates via D-Bus signals
- Disabled by default

⚠️ **Security model:** Odio enforces user-session mutations only at the application layer, regardless of D-Bus or polkit configuration. System units are strictly read-only. See [Security](#security) for full details.

### Power Management

Remote reboot and power-off via the REST API — no SSH needed for day-to-day operations. Disabled by default. Uses `org.freedesktop.login1` D-Bus interface.

### REST API

- `<50ms` p95 response time, `0%` CPU on idle — tested on Raspberry Pi B and B+
- Localhost binding by default, configurable per network interface
- Zeroconf/mDNS auto-discovery on the LAN (opt-in)

## Platform Support

| Architecture | Package | Tested on |
|---|---|---|
| amd64 | deb, rpm | Fedora 43 Gnome, Debian 13 KDE |
| arm64 | deb, rpm | Raspberry Pi 3/4/5 (64-bit) |
| armv7hf | deb, rpm | Raspberry Pi 2/3 (32-bit) |
| **armhf (ARMv6)** | deb, rpm | **Raspberry Pi B / B+ / Zero** |

Pre-built packages and a multi-arch Docker image (amd64, arm64, arm/v6, arm/v7) are available on every build.

## Roadmap

- **v0.6** — Built-in web dashboard served by Odio itself at `/ui/`
- **v0.7** — Bluetooth backend: turn your Linux box into a fully API-controllable BT speaker, exposed as a `media_player` in HA
- Later: SSE push events, Authentication, Wayland Remote Control, Photos Casting

## Installation

### Packages (deb / rpm)

Pre-built packages for amd64, arm64, armhf (ARMv6), and armv7hf are available as artifacts on each [build workflow run](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api/actions/workflows/build.yml).

```bash
# Debian/Ubuntu/Raspberry Pi OS
sudo dpkg -i odio-api_<version>_amd64.deb

# Fedora/RHEL
sudo rpm -i odio-api-<version>.x86_64.rpm
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api.git
cd go-odio-api
task build    # builds CSS + Go binary with version from git
./bin/odio-api
```

### systemd User Service

Create `~/.config/systemd/user/odio-api.service`:

```ini
[Unit]
Description=Dbus api for Odio
Documentation=https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api
Wants=sound.target
After=sound.target
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]
ExecStart=/usr/bin/odio-api
Restart=always
RestartSec=12
TimeoutSec=30

[Install]
WantedBy=default.target
```

```bash
systemctl --user daemon-reload
systemctl --user enable odio-api.service
systemctl --user start odio-api.service
```

**Headless systems:** Enable lingering so the user session (PulseAudio/PipeWire, D-Bus, `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR`) survives without an active login:

```bash
sudo loginctl enable-linger <username>
```

### Docker

A pre-built multi-arch image is available on GHCR (amd64, arm64, arm/v6, arm/v7):

```
ghcr.io/b0bbywan/go-odio-api:latest
```

#### Quick start

```bash
# 1. Prepare configuration (bind: all required for Docker)
cp share/config.yaml config.yaml
# Edit config.yaml: set bind: all

# 2. (Optional) Provide your PulseAudio cookie
cp ~/.config/pulse/cookie ./cookie

# 3. (Optional) Only needed if docker compose config shows wrong paths
cp .env.example .env

# 4. Start
docker compose up -d
```

The `docker-compose.yml` reads `UID`, `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR`, `HOME` and `DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS`
directly from your shell environment — no configuration needed for a standard Linux setup.
See `.env.example` if your shell doesn't export these automatically (e.g. fish).

Environment variables passed to the container:

| Variable | Source | Purpose |
|---|---|---|
| `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR` | host env → fallback `/run/user/$UID` | D-Bus and PulseAudio runtime directory |
| `DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS` | host env → fallback derived from `XDG_RUNTIME_DIR` | User D-Bus session socket |
| `HOME` | host env → fallback `/home/odio` | PulseAudio cookie lookup path |

Volumes mounted (all read-only):

| Volume | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `./config.yaml` | odio configuration |
| `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/bus` | user D-Bus session socket |
| `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/systemd` | user systemd folder (utmp unavailable) |
| `/run/utmp` | user systemd monitoring (utmp available) |
| `/var/run/dbus/system_bus_socket` | system D-Bus socket |
| `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/pulse` | PulseAudio socket |
| `./cookie` → `$HOME/.config/pulse/cookie` | PulseAudio cookie |

**Note:** `bind` must be set to `all` in `config.yaml` for Docker (bridge network). Zeroconf won't work in bridge network mode. Host network mode is strongly discouraged.

To build locally instead:
```bash
docker build -t odio-api .
```

#### Command-line Flags

- `--config <path>` — specify a custom YAML configuration file
- `--version` — print version and exit
- `--help` — show help message

## Configuration

Configuration file locations (in order of precedence):
- Specified with `--config <path>`
- `~/.config/odio-api/config.yaml` (user-specific)
- `/etc/odio-api/config.yaml` (system-wide)
- A default configuration is available in `share/config.yaml`

Disabling a backend disables the backend and all its routes.

```yaml
bind: lo
logLevel: info

api:
  enabled: true
  port: 8018

zeroconf:
  enabled: false

mpris:
  enabled: true
  timeout: 5s

pulseaudio:
  enabled: true

systemd:
  enabled: false
  system:
    -
  user:
    -

power:
  enabled: false
  capabilities:
    poweroff: false
    reboot: false
```

### Backend configuration examples

#### systemd (opt-in, whitelist required)

```yaml
systemd:
  enabled: true
  system:
    - bluetooth.service
    - upmpdcli.service
  user:
    - pipewire-pulse.service
    - pulseaudio.service
    - mpd.service                       # see [1]
    - shairport-sync.service            # see [2]
    - snapclient.service                # incompatible with mpris
    - spotifyd.service                  # see [3]
    - firefox-kiosk@netflix.com.service # default support for mpris
    - firefox-kiosk@youtube.com.service # default support for mpris
    - firefox-kiosk@my.home-assistant.io.service
    - kodi.service                      # see [4]
    - vlc.service                       # default support for mpris
    - plex.service                      # see [5]
```
[1] Install `mpd-mpris` or `mpDris2` for MPRIS support
[2] Check my [article on Medium: Shairport Sync/Airplay with PulseAudio and MPRIS support](https://medium.com/@mathieu-requillart/set-up-a-b83d9c980e75)
[3] Default on desktop; on headless, your spotifyd version [must be built with MPRIS support](https://docs.spotifyd.rs/advanced/dbus.html)
[4] Install [Kodi Add-on: MPRIS D-Bus interface](https://github.com/wastis/MediaPlayerRemoteInterface#)
[5] Maybe supported, untested

#### Power Management

```yaml
power:
  enabled: true
  capabilities:
    poweroff: true
    reboot: true
```

#### Network binding

```yaml
bind: lo                      # loopback only (default)
# bind: enp2s0                # single LAN interface
# bind: [lo, enp2s0]          # loopback + LAN (required for UI access from the network)
# bind: [lo, enp2s0, wlan0]   # loopback + ethernet + wifi
# bind: all                   # all interfaces — 0.0.0.0 (Docker, remote access)
```

**Note:** The built-in web UI requires `lo` to be in the bind list. If `lo` is absent, the UI is automatically disabled.

#### Zeroconf / mDNS

```yaml
bind: eno1
zeroconf:
  enabled: true
```

Odio advertises itself via mDNS. Look for `_http._tcp.local.` → instance `odio-api`. Disabled on `lo` binding.

### Security defaults

- **Localhost binding by default** — prevents accidental network exposure
- **Systemd disabled by default** — service control must be explicitly enabled and configured
- **Read-only Docker mounts** — all volume mounts are read-only in the provided `docker-compose.yml`
- **Zeroconf opt-in** — mDNS adapts to `bind`: disabled on `lo`, enabled on specific interfaces

## API Endpoints

### Server Information

```
GET    /server                             # {"hostname":"","os_platform":"","os_version":"","api_sw":"","api_version":"","backends":{"mpris":true,"pulseaudio":true,"systemd":false,"zeroconf":false}}
```

### MPRIS Media Players

```
GET    /players                           # List all media players
POST   /players/{player}/play             # Play
POST   /players/{player}/pause            # Pause
POST   /players/{player}/play_pause       # Toggle play/pause
POST   /players/{player}/stop             # Stop
POST   /players/{player}/next             # Next track
POST   /players/{player}/previous         # Previous track
POST   /players/{player}/seek             # Seek (body: {"offset": 1000000})
POST   /players/{player}/position         # Set position (body: {"track_id": "...", "position": 0})
POST   /players/{player}/volume           # Set volume (body: {"volume": 0.5})
POST   /players/{player}/loop             # Set loop status (body: {"loop": "None|Track|Playlist"})
POST   /players/{player}/shuffle          # Set shuffle (body: {"shuffle": true})
```

### PulseAudio

```
GET    /audio/server                      # Get server info
POST   /audio/server/mute                 # Mute/unmute server
POST   /audio/server/volume               # Set server volume (body: {"volume": 0.5})
GET    /audio/clients                     # List audio clients (sink-inputs)
POST   /audio/clients/{sink}/mute         # Mute/unmute client
POST   /audio/clients/{sink}/volume       # Set client volume (body: {"volume": 0.5})
```

### Systemd Services

```
GET    /services                          # List all monitored services
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/start     # Start service (scope: system|user)
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/stop      # Stop service (scope: system|user)
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/restart   # Restart service
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/enable    # Enable service (scope: system|user)
POST   /services/{scope}/{unit}/disable   # Disable service
```

### Power Management

```
GET    /power/                            # Power capabilities {"reboot": true, "power_off": false}
POST   /power/power_off                   # Poweroff (403 if not declared in capabilities)
POST   /power/reboot                      # Reboot (403 if not declared in capabilities)
```

## Security

### systemd backend

⚠️ **Security Notice**

Systemd control is disabled by default and requires an explicit whitelist. Odio mitigates risks with deliberate security design:

- **Disabled by default** — must explicitly set `systemd.enabled: true` AND configure units. Empty config → auto-disabled even with `enabled: true`.
- **Localhost only** — API binds to `lo` by default. Never expose to untrusted networks or the Internet.
- **User-only mutations** — start/stop/restart/enable/disable only work on user D-Bus. System units are strictly read-only, enforced at the application layer regardless of D-Bus or polkit configuration. This protects against misconfigured or compromised D-Bus setups.
- **Root forbidden by design** — Odio refuses to run as root.
- **No preconfigured units** — nothing managed unless explicitly listed.

**You must knowingly enable this at your own risk.** Odio is free software and comes with no warranty.

### REST API

⚠️ **Security Notice:** No authentication mechanism is provided. **Never expose this API to untrusted networks or the Internet.** Designed for localhost or trusted LAN use only.

## Architecture

### Key Design: The User Session

All multimedia services run as systemd user units — not system-wide daemons. This unlocks a single, unified D-Bus session bus where PulseAudio/PipeWire, MPRIS players, and user systemd units all coexist. Odio listens to that bus and exposes everything via HTTP. Add a new MPRIS player — it appears immediately, zero code or config change.

### Backends

- **MPRIS Backend** — D-Bus communication with media players, smart caching, real-time D-Bus signal updates
- **PulseAudio Backend** — native PulseAudio protocol (pure Go, no libpulse), real-time event monitoring
- **Systemd Backend** — D-Bus with filesystem monitoring fallback (`/run/user/{uid}/systemd/units`)
- **Power Backend** — `org.freedesktop.login1` D-Bus interface

### Performance

- Caching reduces D-Bus calls by ~90%
- D-Bus signal-based updates instead of polling
- Batch property retrieval
- Automatic heartbeat management for position tracking
- Connection pooling and timeout handling

## Development

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.24 or higher

### Running Tests

```bash
go test ./...
go test -cover ./...

go test ./backend/mpris/...
go test ./backend/pulseaudio/...
go test ./backend/systemd/...
```

### Building

The project uses [Task](https://taskfile.dev) for build automation.

```bash
# Install Task (once)
go install github.com/go-task/task/v3/cmd/task@latest

# Build for the current host (CSS + Go binary, version from git)
task build

# Cross-compile for all supported architectures (output: dist/)
task build:all-arch

# Individual targets
task build:linux-amd64     # x86_64
task build:linux-arm64     # RPi 3/4/5 64-bit
task build:linux-armv7hf   # RPi 2/3 32-bit (ARMv7)
task build:linux-armhf     # RPi B/B+/Zero (ARMv6, RPi OS armhf)

# CSS only
task css              # Ensure CSS is available (compile or download from CDN)
task css-local        # Compile locally (requires Tailwind CLI)
task css:watch        # Watch mode for development
```

**Note:** `task build` injects the version via `-ldflags` from `git describe`. The version is visible via `./bin/odio-api --version`.

#### CSS Build Strategy

The UI uses Tailwind CSS with an intelligent multi-architecture build strategy:

- **Development (x64/arm64/armv7)** — `task build` compiles CSS locally using Tailwind CLI
- **Legacy ARM (ARMv6 — Raspberry Pi B/B+)** — `task build` downloads pre-built CSS from CDN (`https://bobbywan.me/odio-css/`)

Tailwind CLI doesn't provide ARMv6 binaries. The CSS is architecture-independent, so it's compiled on x64 and distributed via CDN.

**CDN structure:**
```
https://bobbywan.me/odio-css/
  main/abc1234.css          # commit-specific
  main/latest.css           # latest for branch
  tags/v0.6.0.css           # release tags (never cleaned)
```

CSS files are **not** committed to the repository.

### Packaging (deb / rpm)

Packages are built with [nfpm](https://nfpm.goreleaser.com/) via Task.

```bash
# Install nfpm (once)
go install github.com/goreleaser/nfpm/v2/cmd/nfpm@latest

# Build all packages for all architectures (output: dist/)
task package:all

# Individual targets
task package:deb:linux-amd64     # .deb amd64
task package:deb:linux-arm64     # .deb arm64
task package:deb:linux-armv7hf   # .deb armv7hf
task package:deb:linux-armhf     # .deb armhf (ARMv6, RPi OS)
task package:rpm:linux-amd64     # .rpm x86_64
task package:rpm:linux-arm64     # .rpm aarch64
task package:rpm:linux-armv7hf   # .rpm armv7hl
task package:rpm:linux-armhf     # .rpm armv6hl
```

## Dependencies

- [spf13/viper](https://github.com/spf13/viper) — configuration
- [godbus/dbus](https://github.com/godbus/dbus) — D-Bus bindings
- [coreos/go-systemd](https://github.com/coreos/go-systemd) — systemd D-Bus bindings
- [the-jonsey/pulseaudio](https://github.com/the-jonsey/pulseaudio) — pure-Go PulseAudio native protocol (no libpulse)
- [grandcat/zeroconf](https://github.com/grandcat/zeroconf) — mDNS / DNS-SD

## Contributing

Odio was first pushed on January 25, 2026. It's early stage — v0.4 works out of the box, but there's a long road ahead. Expect bugs.

**Does it work on your setup? What breaks? What's missing?**

Try it. Tell me what works and what doesn't. Show me your setup. If you want to contribute code, even better — Go is a great language for this use case.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

For issues and questions: [GitHub repository](https://github.com/b0bbywan/go-odio-api)

## License

BSD 2-Clause License — see the LICENSE file for details.
